design-notes/matrix/matrix-implementation.md, before:

# Matrix Implementation Details

This document details the technical implementation of Matrix chat in OpenMeet, focusing on key design decisions, patterns, and credential management.

## Service Architecture

### Matrix Module Services

1. **MatrixCoreService**
   - Handles SDK loading and initialization
   - Manages admin client for system operations
   - Provides admin token regeneration capability
   - Uses dynamic imports for ESM compatibility
   - Centralizes configuration and access to Matrix API

2. **MatrixUserService**
   - Manages user provisioning and authentication
   - Handles Matrix user creation and login
   - Synchronizes display names with OpenMeet
   - Implements token refresh and credential management

3. **MatrixRoomService**
   - Creates and configures Matrix rooms
   - Manages room membership and invitations
   - Ensures admin is in room before performing operations
   - Handles power levels based on OpenMeet roles
   - Provides utility methods for room operations
   - Gracefully handles rate limiting errors

4. **MatrixMessageService**
   - Sends and retrieves messages
   - Manages typing notifications
   - Handles timeline event processing
   - Formats messages for consistent display

5. **MatrixGateway**
   - Implements WebSocket communication via Socket.io
   - Authenticates connections with JWT tokens
   - Broadcasts room events to connected clients
   - Manages tenant-aware connection lifecycle

### Chat Module Adapters

1. **MatrixChatServiceAdapter**
   - Implements the ChatService interface using Matrix
   - Acts as the bridge between Chat and Matrix modules
   - Handles error recovery and credential management
   - Provides chat functionality to controllers

2. **MatrixChatProvider**
   - Lower-level adapter for Matrix operations
   - Implements the ChatProvider interface
   - Abstracts Matrix-specific implementation details
   - Handles room creation, joining, and message sending

## Credential Management

### Error Handling Flow

The credential management system implements a multi-stage fallback approach for handling Matrix token errors:

#### For Regular Users:
```
Try operation → If M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN error → Try token refresh → If fails → Reprovision
```

#### For Admin Operations:
```
Try operation → If M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN error → Regenerate admin token using password → Retry operation
```

### Implementation Patterns for Error Handling

#### User Operation Pattern
- First attempt the Matrix operation
- If token error (M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN) is encountered, refresh user credentials
- If refresh fails, reprovision the user with new Matrix credentials
- Retry the original operation with new credentials
- Handle other errors appropriately (logging, retries for rate limiting)

#### Admin Operation Pattern
- First ensure admin is in the target room
- Attempt the Matrix admin operation
- If token error (M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN) is encountered, regenerate admin token
- Use stored admin password to authenticate and get new token
- Update admin client with new token
- Retry the original operation
- If token regeneration fails, log error and notify administrators

### Key Strategies

1. **Preserve Matrix User IDs**
   - When refreshing tokens, keep existing Matrix IDs
   - Avoids duplicating users in Matrix
   - Maintains consistent identity across resets

2. **Progressive Recovery**
   - First attempt: refresh token for existing Matrix ID
   - Second attempt: full re-provisioning if needed
   - Transparent to end users

3. **Admin Token Regeneration**
   - Store admin password securely in environment variables
   - Automatically regenerate admin tokens when they expire
   - Maintain system operations without manual intervention

4. **Proactive Admin Room Joining**
   - Ensure admin user joins rooms before operations
   - Check room membership status before operations
   - Avoid common "User not in room" errors

5. **Security-First Approach**
   - Server-side credential management only
   - No exposure of Matrix tokens to frontend
   - Secure storage in database

6. **Reset Options**
   ```sql
   -- Preserve Matrix IDs (preferred)
   UPDATE "user" SET matrix_access_token = NULL, matrix_device_id = NULL;
   
   -- Full Reset (if needed)
   UPDATE "user" SET matrix_user_id = NULL, matrix_access_token = NULL;
   UPDATE events SET "matrixRoomId" = NULL;
   UPDATE groups SET "matrixRoomId" = NULL;
   DELETE FROM "chatRooms";
   ```

## Performance Optimizations

1. **Request-scoped Caching**
   - Prevents redundant database queries
   - Caches entity relationships
   - Automatically initialized and cleaned up

2. **Matrix Room Joining**
   - Direct join-first strategy with fallback
   - Caches room membership state
   - Reduces redundant API calls

3. **WebSocket Efficiency**
   - Optimized message structure
   - Debouncing for typing notifications
   - Proper connection lifecycle management

4. **Matrix SDK ESM Compatibility**
   - Dynamic import pattern to handle ESM modules
   - Initialization in onModuleInit
   - Works in all environments (development, testing, production)

## Matrix JS SDK Storage Configuration

### IndexedDB Storage Critical Requirements

**Breaking Changes in matrix-js-sdk v30+**:
- Must call `setUserCreator()` before `store.startup()`
- Must await `store.startup()` before `createClient()`
- Web worker scripts improve stability and prevent transaction errors

**Storage Safety Patterns**:
- Feature detection before IndexedDB access prevents browser compatibility issues
- Safe fallback to MemoryStore when IndexedDB fails
- Request persistent storage via `navigator.storage.persist()` to prevent browser eviction
- Monitor storage quota with `navigator.storage.estimate()`

**Critical Warnings**:
- Only one MatrixClient instance per IndexedDB database to prevent data corruption
- Different browsers have varying IndexedDB quota behaviors
- "Cannot read properties of undefined" errors typically indicate missing startup sequence

## Permission Management

### Power Level Assignment

Power levels in Matrix rooms are assigned based on OpenMeet roles:

- Event/group creators: moderator status (power level 50)
- Event admins/hosts: moderator privileges (power level 50)
- Group admins/moderators: moderator privileges (power level 50)
- Regular members: default power level (0)

### Permission Checks

- For events: User must have host or moderator role AND ManageEvent permission
- For groups: User must have owner, admin, or moderator role

## Direct Matrix Client Access

OpenMeet allows users to set their own Matrix passwords for use with third-party clients:

```
POST /api/matrix/set-password
{
  "password": "securePassword123"
}
```

Benefits:
- Access to advanced Matrix client features
- Use on multiple devices and clients
- Integration with other Matrix services

## Key Design Decisions

1. **Admin API vs. Shared Secret**
   - Using Admin API for user registration
   - More secure - no shared secret exposed
   - Better isolation from Matrix implementation details

2. **WebSocket vs. SSE**
   - Replaced Server-Sent Events with WebSockets
   - Bidirectional communication
   - Room-based event broadcasting
   - Proper connection lifecycle management

3. **Event-Based Architecture**
   - Loosely coupled modules communicate via events
   - Events use slugs for entity identification
   - Clean separation of concerns between modules

4. **Domain-Driven Design**
   - Clean interfaces for module boundaries
   - Dependency injection for service composition
   - Adapters for external systems like Matrix

## Current Technical Challenges

1. **Comprehensive Testing**
   - Expanded test coverage for credential management
   - WebSocket integration testing
   - Load testing and performance verification

2. **Permission Refinements**
   - Single source of truth for permissions
   - Granular mapping between roles and Matrix powers
   - Periodic permission verification

## Current Encryption Implementation

As of March 2025, OpenMeet uses the following approach for Matrix room encryption:

1. **Server-Side Configuration**
   - Matrix server has encryption capabilities enabled (`enable_key_server: true`)
   - Default room creation setting allows encryption but doesn't enforce it

2. **Room Creation Policy**
   - OpenMeet creates all rooms (event, group, direct) with encryption disabled by default
   - This decision addresses key management challenges while maintaining compatibility
   - Client-side encryption remains possible through third-party Matrix clients

3. **Encryption Opt-In**
   - Users who require encrypted communications can:
     a) Use external Matrix clients with their OpenMeet Matrix credentials
     b) Create encrypted direct messages through those clients
     c) Manage their encryption keys using standard Matrix client tools

4. **Rationale**
   - Server-side sent messages cannot properly participate in encryption (no persistent crypto store)
   - Automatic encryption led to unreadable message history across sessions
   - This approach balances security needs with practical usability requirements

## Future Enhancements

1. **End-to-End Encryption Options**
   - Currently: Backend clients send unencrypted messages, third-party clients can use encryption
   - Implementation options:
     a) **Client-Side Only Encryption**: Handle encryption exclusively in frontend clients, backend never handles encrypted content
     b) **Persistent Backend Clients**: Maintain long-lived client instances per user with persistent crypto store in database
     c) **Key Backup Implementation**: Implement Matrix key backup/recovery with securely stored backup keys
   - Challenges with current architecture:
     - Temporary clients have no persistent crypto store
     - Each message send creates a new "device" without historical keys
     - Message history becomes unreadable for users when logging in
     - No device verification across sessions
   - Recommended approach: Keep encryption for client-side only, use unencrypted rooms for server-initiated messages

2. **Advanced Search**
   - Full-text search across chat history
   - Advanced filtering options

3. **Performance Monitoring**
   - Track sync performance metrics
   - Identify and address bottlenecks

4. **Offline Support**
   - Cache messages when offline
   - Queue outgoing messages
   - Sync when connection is restored

Commit message:

docs: update Matrix design docs to reflect production implementation
Matrix documentation contained outdated references, future dates, and
described architectures that were never implemented. Updated all docs
to accurately reflect the September 2025 production deployment:

- Removed archive directory with obsolete planning docs
- Updated dates from "July 2025" to "September 2025"
- Clarified single AppService bot architecture (not per-tenant bots)
- Removed WebSocket proxy references (direct client-to-Matrix)
- Updated client integration status from "planning" to "implemented"
- Fixed MatrixGateway references (UI component, not API service)
- Moved bluesky-login-flow.md out of matrix directory
- Updated matrix-for-chat.md with correct file references

All changes improve documentation accuracy for current implementation.

design-notes/matrix/matrix-implementation.md, after:

# Matrix Implementation Details

This document details the technical implementation of Matrix chat in OpenMeet, focusing on key design decisions, patterns, and credential management.

## Service Architecture

### Matrix Module Services

1. **MatrixCoreService**
   - Handles SDK loading and initialization
   - Manages admin client for system operations
   - Provides admin token regeneration capability
   - Uses dynamic imports for ESM compatibility
   - Centralizes configuration and access to Matrix API

2. **MatrixUserService**
   - Manages user provisioning and authentication
   - Handles Matrix user creation and login
   - Synchronizes display names with OpenMeet
   - Implements token refresh and credential management

3. **MatrixRoomService**
   - Creates and configures Matrix rooms
   - Manages room membership and invitations
   - Ensures admin is in room before performing operations
   - Handles power levels based on OpenMeet roles
   - Provides utility methods for room operations
   - Gracefully handles rate limiting errors

4. **MatrixMessageService**
   - Sends and retrieves messages
   - Manages typing notifications
   - Handles timeline event processing
   - Formats messages for consistent display

**Note**: The previous WebSocket-based MatrixGateway has been removed. Chat messaging now happens directly between the client and Matrix server via the Matrix JS SDK.

### Chat Module Adapters

1. **MatrixChatServiceAdapter**
   - Implements the ChatService interface using Matrix
   - Acts as the bridge between Chat and Matrix modules
   - Handles error recovery and credential management
   - Provides chat functionality to controllers

2. **MatrixChatProvider**
   - Lower-level adapter for Matrix operations
   - Implements the ChatProvider interface
   - Abstracts Matrix-specific implementation details
   - Handles room creation, joining, and message sending

## Credential Management

### Error Handling Flow

The credential management system implements a multi-stage fallback approach for handling Matrix token errors:

#### For Regular Users:
```
Try operation → If M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN error → Try token refresh → If fails → Reprovision
```

#### For Admin Operations:
```
Try operation → If M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN error → Regenerate admin token using password → Retry operation
```

### Implementation Patterns for Error Handling

#### User Operation Pattern
- First attempt the Matrix operation
- If token error (M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN) is encountered, refresh user credentials
- If refresh fails, reprovision the user with new Matrix credentials
- Retry the original operation with new credentials
- Handle other errors appropriately (logging, retries for rate limiting)

#### Admin Operation Pattern
- First ensure admin is in the target room
- Attempt the Matrix admin operation
- If token error (M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN) is encountered, regenerate admin token
- Use stored admin password to authenticate and get new token
- Update admin client with new token
- Retry the original operation
- If token regeneration fails, log error and notify administrators

### Key Strategies

1. **Preserve Matrix User IDs**
   - When refreshing tokens, keep existing Matrix IDs
   - Avoids duplicating users in Matrix
   - Maintains consistent identity across resets

2. **Progressive Recovery**
   - First attempt: refresh token for existing Matrix ID
   - Second attempt: full re-provisioning if needed
   - Transparent to end users

3. **Admin Token Regeneration**
   - Store admin password securely in environment variables
   - Automatically regenerate admin tokens when they expire
   - Maintain system operations without manual intervention

4. **Proactive Admin Room Joining**
   - Ensure admin user joins rooms before operations
   - Check room membership status before operations
   - Avoid common "User not in room" errors

5. **Security-First Approach**
   - Server-side credential management only
   - No exposure of Matrix tokens to frontend
   - Secure storage in database

6. **Reset Options**
   ```sql
   -- Preserve Matrix IDs (preferred)
   UPDATE "user" SET matrix_access_token = NULL, matrix_device_id = NULL;
   
   -- Full Reset (if needed)
   UPDATE "user" SET matrix_user_id = NULL, matrix_access_token = NULL;
   UPDATE events SET "matrixRoomId" = NULL;
   UPDATE groups SET "matrixRoomId" = NULL;
   DELETE FROM "chatRooms";
   ```

## Performance Optimizations

1. **Request-scoped Caching**
   - Prevents redundant database queries
   - Caches entity relationships
   - Automatically initialized and cleaned up

2. **Matrix Room Joining**
   - Direct join-first strategy with fallback
   - Caches room membership state
   - Reduces redundant API calls

3. **WebSocket Efficiency**
   - Optimized message structure
   - Debouncing for typing notifications
   - Proper connection lifecycle management

4. **Matrix SDK ESM Compatibility**
   - Dynamic import pattern to handle ESM modules
   - Initialization in onModuleInit
   - Works in all environments (development, testing, production)

## Matrix JS SDK Storage Configuration

### IndexedDB Storage Critical Requirements

**Breaking Changes in matrix-js-sdk v30+**:
- Must call `setUserCreator()` before `store.startup()`
- Must await `store.startup()` before `createClient()`
- Web worker scripts improve stability and prevent transaction errors

**Storage Safety Patterns**:
- Feature detection before IndexedDB access prevents browser compatibility issues
- Safe fallback to MemoryStore when IndexedDB fails
- Request persistent storage via `navigator.storage.persist()` to prevent browser eviction
- Monitor storage quota with `navigator.storage.estimate()`

**Critical Warnings**:
- Only one MatrixClient instance per IndexedDB database to prevent data corruption
- Different browsers have varying IndexedDB quota behaviors
- "Cannot read properties of undefined" errors typically indicate missing startup sequence

## Permission Management

### Power Level Assignment

Power levels in Matrix rooms are assigned based on OpenMeet roles:

- Event/group creators: moderator status (power level 50)
- Event admins/hosts: moderator privileges (power level 50)
- Group admins/moderators: moderator privileges (power level 50)
- Regular members: default power level (0)

### Permission Checks

- For events: User must have host or moderator role AND ManageEvent permission
- For groups: User must have owner, admin, or moderator role

## Direct Matrix Client Access

OpenMeet allows users to set their own Matrix passwords for use with third-party clients:

```
POST /api/matrix/set-password
{
  "password": "securePassword123"
}
```

Benefits:
- Access to advanced Matrix client features
- Use on multiple devices and clients
- Integration with other Matrix services

## Key Design Decisions

1. **Admin API vs. Shared Secret**
   - Using Admin API for user registration
   - More secure - no shared secret exposed
   - Better isolation from Matrix implementation details

2. **WebSocket vs. SSE**
   - Replaced Server-Sent Events with WebSockets
   - Bidirectional communication
   - Room-based event broadcasting
   - Proper connection lifecycle management

3. **Event-Based Architecture**
   - Loosely coupled modules communicate via events
   - Events use slugs for entity identification
   - Clean separation of concerns between modules

4. **Domain-Driven Design**
   - Clean interfaces for module boundaries
   - Dependency injection for service composition
   - Adapters for external systems like Matrix

## Current Technical Challenges

1. **Comprehensive Testing**
   - Expanded test coverage for credential management
   - WebSocket integration testing
   - Load testing and performance verification

2. **Permission Refinements**
   - Single source of truth for permissions
   - Granular mapping between roles and Matrix powers
   - Periodic permission verification

## Current Encryption Implementation

As of March 2025, OpenMeet uses the following approach for Matrix room encryption:

1. **Server-Side Configuration**
   - Matrix server has encryption capabilities enabled (`enable_key_server: true`)
   - Default room creation setting allows encryption but doesn't enforce it

2. **Room Creation Policy**
   - OpenMeet creates all rooms (event, group, direct) with encryption disabled by default
   - This decision addresses key management challenges while maintaining compatibility
   - Client-side encryption remains possible through third-party Matrix clients

3. **Encryption Opt-In**
   - Users who require encrypted communications can:
     a) Use external Matrix clients with their OpenMeet Matrix credentials
     b) Create encrypted direct messages through those clients
     c) Manage their encryption keys using standard Matrix client tools

4. **Rationale**
   - Server-side sent messages cannot properly participate in encryption (no persistent crypto store)
   - Automatic encryption led to unreadable message history across sessions
   - This approach balances security needs with practical usability requirements

## Future Enhancements

1. **End-to-End Encryption Options**
   - Currently: Backend clients send unencrypted messages, third-party clients can use encryption
   - Implementation options:
     a) **Client-Side Only Encryption**: Handle encryption exclusively in frontend clients, backend never handles encrypted content
     b) **Persistent Backend Clients**: Maintain long-lived client instances per user with persistent crypto store in database
     c) **Key Backup Implementation**: Implement Matrix key backup/recovery with securely stored backup keys
   - Challenges with current architecture:
     - Temporary clients have no persistent crypto store
     - Each message send creates a new "device" without historical keys
     - Message history becomes unreadable for users when logging in
     - No device verification across sessions
   - Recommended approach: Keep encryption for client-side only, use unencrypted rooms for server-initiated messages

2. **Advanced Search**
   - Full-text search across chat history
   - Advanced filtering options

3. **Performance Monitoring**
   - Track sync performance metrics
   - Identify and address bottlenecks

4. **Offline Support**
   - Cache messages when offline
   - Queue outgoing messages
   - Sync when connection is restored
