design-notes/matrix/README.md, before:

# Matrix Integration for OpenMeet

This directory contains streamlined documentation for the Matrix chat integration in OpenMeet.

## Documentation Overview

1. [Matrix Architecture](./matrix-architecture.md)
   - High-level architecture overview
   - Key components and their responsibilities
   - System data flow
   - User experience improvements
   - Implementation status

2. [Matrix Implementation](./matrix-implementation.md)
   - Detailed service architecture
   - Credential management strategies
   - Performance optimizations
   - Permission management
   - Key design decisions
   - Future enhancements

## Quick Start

For developers new to the Matrix integration:

1. Read [Matrix Architecture](./matrix-architecture.md) first to understand the overall design
2. Review [Matrix Implementation](./matrix-implementation.md) for technical details

## Key Reference

### Important Methods

- `MatrixUserService.provisionMatrixUser()`: User provisioning with credential management
- `MatrixCoreService.regenerateAdminAccessToken()`: Admin token regeneration when expired
- `MatrixRoomService.ensureAdminInRoom()`: Ensures admin is in room before operations
- `MatrixBotService.authenticateBotWithAppService()`: Bot authentication for room operations

### Important Platform Components

- `MatrixChatGateway.vue`: UI component that renders chat interface for events, groups, and direct messages
- `MatrixClientManager.ts`: Manages Matrix JS SDK client lifecycle and authentication
- `MatrixEncryptionManager.ts`: Handles E2E encryption setup and verification

### Error Handling Patterns

1. **User Operation Error Handling**
   - Attempt Matrix operation
   - If token is invalid (M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN), refresh credentials or reprovision user
   - Retry the original operation
   - For rate limiting (M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED), log as warning and backoff gracefully

2. **Admin Operation Error Handling**
   - Ensure admin is in room before attempting operations
   - If admin token is invalid, regenerate using stored password
   - Retry the original operation with new token
   - Handle rate limiting with appropriate warning logs

### Local Development Quick Setup

```bash
# Start Matrix server
docker-compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml up -d

# Get admin token
docker-compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml logs matrix | grep -A 10 "Success! Matrix server initialized"

# Update .env file with token and password
# MATRIX_ADMIN_ACCESS_TOKEN=your_token_from_logs
# MATRIX_ADMIN_PASSWORD=your_admin_password  # Required for token regeneration
```

## Implementation Status

- ✅ Core infrastructure and services
- ✅ Direct Matrix protocol real-time communication
- ✅ MAS (Matrix Authentication Service) integration
- ✅ User provisioning and authentication
- ✅ Room creation and management
- ✅ Service architecture optimization
- ✅ Admin token regeneration
- ✅ Robust room operation error handling
- ✅ E2E encryption support

Commit message:

feat(matrix): default all new chat rooms to public/unencrypted (#369)
Addresses Issue #249 - Matrix integration UX friction

E2EE chat rooms require manual consent screens and session verification,
creating a "prominently under-developed" user experience. This change
makes all new event and group chat rooms public and unencrypted by
default for better UX.

Changes:
- Update generateRoomOptions() to hardcode isPublic=true, encrypted=false
- All NEW events/groups get public chat rooms automatically
- Existing encrypted rooms continue working (no breaking changes)
- Update tests to be flexible with encryption settings
- Add comprehensive design documentation for chat room recreation

Migration path for existing encrypted rooms:
- Users create new events/groups to get public chats
- Future Phase 2 may add recreation API if user demand justifies

Design notes:
- Chat room recreation feature documented in detail
- Phase 1 (current): New rooms only, no API changes needed
- Phase 2 (future): Optional recreation API for existing rooms

Related: #249

design-notes/matrix/README.md, after:

# Matrix Integration for OpenMeet

This directory contains streamlined documentation for the Matrix chat integration in OpenMeet.

## Documentation Overview

1. [Matrix Architecture](./matrix-architecture.md)
   - High-level architecture overview
   - Key components and their responsibilities
   - System data flow
   - User experience improvements
   - Implementation status

2. [Matrix Implementation](./matrix-implementation.md)
   - Detailed service architecture
   - Credential management strategies
   - Performance optimizations
   - Permission management
   - Key design decisions
   - Future enhancements

3. [Chat Room Recreation](./chat-room-recreation.md)
   - Room privacy management and recreation feature
   - Migration from encrypted to public rooms
   - UX improvements for chat access
   - Technical implementation details

## Quick Start

For developers new to the Matrix integration:

1. Read [Matrix Architecture](./matrix-architecture.md) first to understand the overall design
2. Review [Matrix Implementation](./matrix-implementation.md) for technical details

## Key Reference

### Important Methods

- `MatrixUserService.provisionMatrixUser()`: User provisioning with credential management
- `MatrixCoreService.regenerateAdminAccessToken()`: Admin token regeneration when expired
- `MatrixRoomService.ensureAdminInRoom()`: Ensures admin is in room before operations
- `MatrixBotService.authenticateBotWithAppService()`: Bot authentication for room operations

### Important Platform Components

- `MatrixChatGateway.vue`: UI component that renders chat interface for events, groups, and direct messages
- `MatrixClientManager.ts`: Manages Matrix JS SDK client lifecycle and authentication
- `MatrixEncryptionManager.ts`: Handles E2E encryption setup and verification

### Error Handling Patterns

1. **User Operation Error Handling**
   - Attempt Matrix operation
   - If token is invalid (M_UNKNOWN_TOKEN), refresh credentials or reprovision user
   - Retry the original operation
   - For rate limiting (M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED), log as warning and backoff gracefully

2. **Admin Operation Error Handling**
   - Ensure admin is in room before attempting operations
   - If admin token is invalid, regenerate using stored password
   - Retry the original operation with new token
   - Handle rate limiting with appropriate warning logs

### Local Development Quick Setup

```bash
# Start Matrix server
docker-compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml up -d

# Get admin token
docker-compose -f docker-compose-dev.yml logs matrix | grep -A 10 "Success! Matrix server initialized"

# Update .env file with token and password
# MATRIX_ADMIN_ACCESS_TOKEN=your_token_from_logs
# MATRIX_ADMIN_PASSWORD=your_admin_password  # Required for token regeneration
```

## Implementation Status

- ✅ Core infrastructure and services
- ✅ Direct Matrix protocol real-time communication
- ✅ MAS (Matrix Authentication Service) integration
- ✅ User provisioning and authentication
- ✅ Room creation and management
- ✅ Service architecture optimization
- ✅ Admin token regeneration
- ✅ Robust room operation error handling
- ✅ E2E encryption support (currently disabled for better UX)

### Room Configuration (November 2025)

**Current Settings**: All event and group chat rooms are created as **public and unencrypted** for optimal user experience.

**Rationale**:
- E2EE requires consent screens and manual session verification
- Public, unencrypted rooms provide immediate access without friction
- Users can join and see messages instantly without setup steps

**Implementation**: See `matrix-room.service.ts:generateRoomOptions()` which hardcodes `isPublic: true, encrypted: false` for all entity rooms (events and groups). Direct message rooms remain private and encrypted.
